Mathematically stated, a collision attack finds two different messages m1 and m2, such 
that hash(m1) = hash(m2). In a classical collision attack, the attacker has no control 
over the content of either message, but they are arbitrarily chosen by the algorithm.

Much like symmetric-key ciphers are vulnerable to brute force attacks, every 
cryptographic hash function is inherently vulnerable to collisions using a birthday 
attack. Due to the birthday problem, these attacks are much faster than a brute force 
would be. A hash of n bits can be broken in 2n/2 time (evaluations of the hash 
function).

More efficient attacks are possible by employing cryptanalysis to specific hash 
functions. When a collision attack is discovered and is found to be faster than a 
birthday attack, a hash function is often denounced as "broken". The NIST hash function 
competition was largely induced by published collision attacks against two very 
commonly used hash functions, MD5[1] and SHA-1. The collision attacks against MD5 have 
improved so much that, as of 2007, it takes just a few seconds on a regular 
computer.[2] Hash collisions created this way are usually constant length and largely 
unstructured, so cannot directly be applied to attack widespread document formats or 
protocols.

However, workarounds are possible by abusing dynamic constructs present in many 
formats. In this way, two documents would be created which are as similar as possible 
in order to have the same hash value. One document would be shown to an authority to be 
signed, and then the signature could be copied to the other file. Such a malicious 
document would contain two different messages in the same document, but conditionally 
display one or the other through subtle changes to the file:

    Some document formats like PostScript, or macros in Microsoft Word, have 
    conditional constructs.[3][4] (if-then-else) that allow testing whether a location 
    in the file has one value or another in order to control what is displayed.
        TIFF files can contain cropped images, with a different part of an image being 
        displayed without affecting the hash value.[4]
            PDF files are vulnerable to collision attacks by using color value (such 
            that text of one message is displayed with a white color that blends into 
            the background, and text of the other message is displayed with a dark 
            color) which can then be altered to change the signed document's 
            content.[4]
